# CSE302Compilers

Team - Antonia Baies, Aarrya Saraf, and Jonas Treplin. \
Project: Register Allocation. \
Labs and project for CSE302 compilers 


## How to run

The compiler functionality is in `main.py` a basic compile command would be:

```
python main.py examples/benchmark.bx -o examples/benchmark
```

Command syntax is `python main.py file`. An optional `-o path` determines the names of the outputs `path.o` and `path.S`. 
If not specified this is defaults to `out`.  

Additionally we provide different optimisation levels that can be specified with `-O[level]` like in GCC. The default Level is `O0` These levels include:

O0: No optimisation is done we go straight SRC -> AST -> TAC -> ASM. Every variable is spilled by default. This is seen as the most reliable compilation to see if the compiler is correct.   
O1: In this case the compilation procedure goes SRC ->AST -> TAC -> CFG -> TAC -> ASM. In the CFG stage we only perform block coalescing and unconditional jump threading. Also we run liveness analysis, but it is used for nothing in this optimisation step.  
O2:  This optimisation level introduces SSA and SSA minimization the pipeline goes SRC ->AST -> TAC -> CFG -> SSA -> TAC -> ASM. In SSA form we perform rename and null choice elimination but no copy propagation (thus the more complex SSA deserialization is not needed). Also we add conditional jump threading in the CFG step.   
O3: In this optimisation level we add register allocation (SRC ->AST -> TAC -> CFG -> SSA -> TAC -> ETAC -> ASM).  The register allocation is run on the deconstructed TAC.  
O4: This level only adds only two final optimisations: copy propagation in the SSA phase and register coalescing in the allocation step. 

Overall we observe about a 40% gain in runtime when moving from O0 to O4 on our benchmark.bx file.

## Liveness Analysis and SSA construction

The code to compute liveness information on a TAC CFG can be found in `lib/liveness.py`. It is implemented in the `LivenessAnalyzer` class and follows the procedure outlined in the lecture in a straightforward way.

All the code related to SSA construction is found in `lib/ssa.py`. The class `SSACrudeGenerator` implements the procedure outlined in the lecture:

1. For each block insert phony definitions for all live in instructions
2. Append a version to each variable which is increased each time it is written to 
3. Convert the phony definitions into proper phi instructions using the last version of each predecessor block.

Since we use a different datastructure for SSA than TAC we also need to replace the predecessor and successor blocks in the meantime. 

We use the `SSALivenessAnalyzer` in `lib/liveness.py` to annotate liveness information to the SSA form again. This could probably done a bit simpler if we just carry over and properly rename the liveness info in the construction step.

## SSA Optimization

All optimization in SSA Form is done in `SSAOptimizer` in `lib/ssa.py`. We have 3 optimizations:

1. Copy Propagation: A copy in SSA form `%1.n = copy %0.m` can be replaced by gloablly renaming `%1.n` as `%0.m`. THis is rather straight forward to do. An requires only one single pass
2. Null choice elimination and rename simplification. These are used im union each time we perform all possible rename simplifications we follow up by eliminating all null choice phis. This goes on until we can't find any renames any more.

## SSA Deconstruction

The deconstruction is implemented in `SSADeconstructor` in `lib/ssa.py`. This performs the advanced deconstruction technique outlined in the lecture:

Every `%x.0 = phi (L1 : %y1.v1, ..., Ln: %yn.vn)` gets converted into a `%x.0 = copy %yi.vi` at the end of the `Li` block. If we have any circular copies that could lead to dangerous undesired overrides we detect this and insert a dummy vaariable to break the cycle as outlined in the lecture.

Also we rename all the versioned SSATemps into regular unversioned TACTemps.

## Register Allocation

Register allocation is done on the deconstructed TAC but is implemented in a way that it is possible to also do it in SSA form. In this case one only needs to remember to call `SSADeconstructor.rename_alloc` to rename the SSA Temps in the Allocation Record to their regular TAC form.
TODO: Antonia & Aarrya

## Assembly generation

Allocated assembly generation is handled by `AllocAsmGen` in `lib/asmgen2.py` unallocated assembly can be generated by `AsmGen` in `lib/asmgen.py` or by using the `SpillingAllocator` in `lib/alloc.py`.

Usually all instructions translate quite easily from the simple case into the allocated case with only a few extra cases to be added when optimsations can be done such as using the the same register for the input and output of an add instruction when it can be overridden.

Where we really add extra complication is in the calling convention since we have to pay attention to caller and callee-save registers. Thus we need to push all callee-save registers that are used at the beginning of the function and restore them at the end and we have to push all caller-save registers that need to stay alive when we call a function and restore them afterwards. This is further complicated by the need to maintain stac alignment. Also we need to avoid overriding when we have any temporary stored in any of the parameter registers. This is done by pushing them onto the stack before we call the function. Also the way we set up the interference graph construction we add dummy variables such that no variable that needs to stay alive over a call is allocated to one of the param registers. But this may be a bit strong restrictions so we implemented the assembly generation such that we could remove it.

## ! Extra Experimental !: SCCP Optimization

Because I was bored I implemented SCCP from the dataflow project proposal. The code can be found in `lib/dataflow.py`. The SCCP can be activated using the `-O5` option. The real kick comes in after we apply block coalescing after this step. We can reduce the example of `examples/bigcondition2.bx` to just a simple call to print using this. If you want to combine SCCP with Register allocation you need to use `-O6`. 

## Tying it all together

All these converion and optimization steps are tied together in `lib/compile.py`. Where one can see the process for compiling one function in `compile_unit`.
